Link to Github: https://github.com/dacharya64/750WordsDataViz


Zielasko, D., Weyers, B., Bellgardt, M., Pick, S., Meibner, A., Vierjahn, T., & Kuhlen, T. W. (2017, March). Remain seated: towards fully-immersive desktop VR. In 2017 IEEE 3rd Workshop on Everyday Virtual Reality (WEVR) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.

Narayan, M., Waugh, L., Zhang, X., Bafna, P., & Bowman, D. (2005, November). Quantifying the benefits of immersion for collaboration in virtual environments. In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology(pp. 78-81). ACM.

"Remain Seated" focuses on how we can improve virtual reality (VR) tools to make it easier to analyze data in VR, given how people currently work in data analysis. It points out the main problem of current VR tools are in accessibility, with many setups requiring the user to be separate from their desk and physically standing and moving around, which can be both cumbersome and break the workflow an analyst might need when working with and recording information about data. The article then proposes a solution to this problem, detailing some of the current VR methods and techniques, and proposing a prototype for a new system that allows for greater VR integration while mitigating some of the negative consequences of working in VR.

The article starts by outlining the main benefit of working in VR for data analytics--it can help the user better understand the data they are working with by helping them generate an improved mental model. It details several different methods and techniques, and how they can be improved to add to the integration and acceptance of VR in an everyday work environment while sitting at their desk:

Hardware -- The article suggests using a standard head-mounted display with a hand-tracking device, external tracking camera, and general office desk setup (keyboard, mouse, etc.) to allow the user to use their hands in the virtual environment but also easily remove the headset and return to their desktop setup
Selection and Manipulation -- The article suggests using hand gestures for manipulation and displaying menus on the desk rather than upright to reduce fatigue and improve tangibility of the virtual menu. It also suggests displaying the keyboard/mouse in the VE so that the user can still interact with with the virtual environment using those tools.
Travel -- The article suggests using leaning and/or a foot pedal to move around through the virtual environment. This would let the user still travel while remaining seated at the desk, but would help to create some body-based cues for the user to help mitigate disorientation and/or motion sickness.
Cybersickness -- The article suggests creating user profiles detailing the user's gender, age, susceptibility to motion sickness, experience with VR, etc. as preliminary information. This information will help the program to reduce motion sickness by dynamically turning on/off features that contribute to sickness such as field of view, acceleration and velocity in movement through the VE, scene brightness, etc. There is a possibility that this can also be done by measuring the user's heartbeat, sweat levels, etc. to help see when the user is more likely to soon become sick to dynamically change those features.
Presence -- Presence is important to help the user feel situated in the world and immersed, which will help them to better generate the needed mental model. Things like creating a virtual desk, hands, and keyboard will help increase the user's presence.
Collaboration -- The article discusses the importance of collaboration and some of the needed improvements in better development of avatars and multi-user syncing. It does not address how their prototype can increase collaboration.
Linking and Provenance Tracking -- The article proposes a framework in which the VR elements are integrated into the desktop view, so that the user can switch between both easily and their work in the VE is not lost when switching back over to their desktop, leaving them free to annotate and keep notes without the HMD.

The article talks about how we can improve VR systems for a better immersive analytics user experience and immersive workflow, and cites “Immersive Analytics” to talk about mapping real-world data analysis to measure and evaluate workflows. It details a lot of issues with VR, especially in terms of breaking workflow and motion sickness, and provides seeming useful proposals for solutions to mitigate some of these problems, but doesn't talk much about testing those ideas. It would be interesting to see more study on how the different ideas work, particularly together/in tandem. I'm still not sure how desktop / VR environments can be blended, and about how transitions work between the two, which seems biggest barrier for a seamless system.
