
Observe and describe a variety of experiences where you feel particularly
immersed– in any or all of the senses we discussed today. Were you reading an
article, having a deep thought on your own, hearing or playing music, playing a
game, solving a problem? Were you passively observing or actively involved?
What aspects made these activities engaging? compelling? captivating? What
elements were involved? What techniques were in operation?

I find that things in the horror genre are particularly immersive--whether that's horror games, or films, or other kinds of horror-based storytelling. In particular, I find that the psychological-horror elements in games like Prey or Alpha Centauri, where you have things happening to you from an outside force (instead of being able to prevent it, as an agent in that world). Horror creates that sort of tension of becoming suddenly invested in what's going on, wanting to somehow prevent it but being unable to, which keeps you riveted to what is happening--whether that's in a horror movie where you don't have control, or in a game where control is taken from you. This also uses a variety of senses (mostly visual and sound) to create an atmosphere that draws you in, luring you in with a false sense of security and then springing on you something sudden and frightening.


Observe and describe times when you are engaged in some forms of analyzing.
Were you working on homework? Are you making a decision about what bus to
catch? What show to watch? Are you making judgements about your friends or
family? How do you decide what to order at a restaurant? How do you approach
solving a difficult technical problem? Do you have certain analysis habits? Do you
notice other people approaching problems in different ways? How do you know
that your approach is the effective? Do you use multiple approaches?

A lot of my analyzing goes into planning in strategy game Civilization. That's because there are many different elements involved each turn--expanding, military conquest, city production, citizen happiness, foreign relations, spending etc. You need to make judgments about all of these things, trying to balance the different elements and keep into account how that will need to change from turn to turn (for instance, if another civ seems to be amassing a lot of troops, or is building a certain wonder, how to beat them to the punch). Other forms of strategy games also feature this sort of thinking and adapting to situations, such as real-time strategy war games where you have to constantly predict troop movements of the other side, and create enough defensive and offensive fortifications to subvert their army and destroy their assets. Usually success in a strategy means winning the game, so it's pretty easy to determine when analysis is successful, but sometimes this can also feel random, especially if you feel you don't have enough variables to make an informed decision (such as a surprise attack devastating you). I've also found that watching other people's strategies and how they use the interfaces helps, because it draws attention to what I don't do, and better ways of managing my resources.
